.. _release.0.3.0-notes:

=========================
smash 0.3.0 Release Notes
=========================

The smash 0.3.0 release continues the ongoing work to improve the handling, fix possible bugs, clarify the documentation. The highlights are:

- Update compatibility of Conda environments and Dockerfile.
- Improvement of flow accumulation algorithm.
- Improvement of event segmentation algorithm for different time steps in addition to hourly time step.
- New hydrological structure.
- New flow percentiles signatures in optimization.
- New multi-site cost function aggregation method.
- New method to save a sample of Model object data into hdf5.
- Major fixes in distributed optimization and uniform optimization.

------------
Contributors
------------

This release was made possible thanks to the contributions of:

- François Colleoni
- Ngo Nghi Truyen Huynh

---------------
Compatibilities
---------------

Conda environment
*****************

- ``smash`` 
    - environment has been updated to support Python 3.11. 
    - The NumPy version has been pinned ``numpy>=1.13,<1.24`` because of compatibility issue with f90wrap library (see issue `here <https://github.com/jameskermode/f90wrap/issues/175>`__).

- ``smash-dev`` 
    - environment has been updated to support Python 3.11. 
    - The NumPy version has been pinned ``numpy>=1.13,<1.24`` because of compatibility issue with f90wrap library (see issue `here <https://github.com/jameskermode/f90wrap/issues/175>`__). 
    - The `fprettify <https://pypi.org/project/fprettify/>`__ library has been added to format dependencies. Formatting of Fortran files.

Dockerfile
**********

The Dockerfile has been updated and works correctly on Visual Studio Code.

------------
Improvements
------------

Flow accumulation algorithm
***************************

The flow accumulation algorithm used in the :meth:`smash.generate_mesh` method has been changed. The new time complexity is :math:`O(N)`. 
The algorithm is described `here <https://www.abstr-int-cartogr-assoc.net/1/434/2019/ica-abs-1-434-2019.pdf>`__ .

Event segmentation on non-hourly time steps
*******************************************

The :meth:`Model.event_segmentation` method is now adapted for different time steps in addition to hourly time step.

------------
New Features
------------

gr-d Model structure
********************

A new model structure ``gr-d`` with 3 parameters (``cp``, ``cft``, ``lr``) and 3 states (``hp``, ``hft``, ``hlr``) derived from the GR model has been added.

Flow percentiles signatures optimization 
****************************************

The following signatures have been added to optimization:

- ``Cfp2``
   0.02-quantile from flow duration curve.

- ``Cfp10``
   0.1-quantile from flow duration curve.

- ``Cfp50``
   0.5-quantile from flow duration curve.

- ``Cfp90``
   0.9-quantile from flow duration curve.

.. note::
    
    More information can be find in the Math / Num Documentation section

It can be used as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> model.optimize(jobs_fun=["nse", "Cfp2"])
    
Multi-site optimization with the median of the cost functions
*************************************************************

A new alias has been added to compute the median of the cost functions for a multi-site optimization.

.. math::
    
    J_{obs} = \text{med}(J_{obs,k})
    
It can be used as follows:

.. code-block:: python
    
    >>> model.optimize(wgauge="median")
    
Save a sample of the Model object data
**************************************

Two new methods :meth:`smash.save_model_ddt` and :meth:`smash.read_model_ddt` had been added to avoid to save all the data of the Model object (i.e. all precipitation data) but
only the main data. A set of default has been chosen in order to facilitate the use of the method but any kind of data can be extra saved.

It can be used as follows:

To only save default data

.. code-block:: python
    
    >>> smash.save_model_ddt(model, "model_ddt.hdf5")
    
To save default data and subsidiary data

.. code-block:: python
    
    >>> smash.save_model_ddt(model, "model_ddt.hdf5", sub_data={"cost": model.output.cost})
    
To read the file

.. code-block:: python

    >>> dat = smash.read_model_ddt("model_ddt.hdf5")
    
-----
Fixes
-----

Uniform optimization
********************

A bug has been found in spatially uniform optimization with the ``sbs`` algorithm. If one non-optimized parameter is spatially distributed. 
Even if it is not optimized, its value at the output of the optimization is changed to a uniform value. This bug has been fixed by looping only on optimized parameters
instead of all. This bug should have only impacted the following method:

- :meth:`Model.optimize`
    if ``mapping`` is set to ``uniform``, the ``algorithm`` is set to ``sbs`` and one of the non-optimized parameters is spatially distributed.
    
    .. code-block:: python
    
        # Assuming that cft is spatially distributed
        >>> cft_before = model.parameters.cft.copy()
        >>> model.optimize(mapping="uniform", algorithm="sbs", control_vector=["cp"], inplace=True)
        >>> cft_after = model.parameters.cft.copy()
        >>> np.array_equal(cft_before, cft_after)
        False

Distributed optimization
************************

A bug has been found in spatially distributed optimization. The gradients were not correctly computed with respect to the control vector normalization. 
This bug has been fixed by moving the denormalization routine into the forward model which can be now seen by the inverse model. This bug should have only impacteted the
following methods:

- :meth:`Model.optimize`
   if ``mapping`` argument is set to ``distributed``.
   
   .. code-block:: python
        
        >>> model.optimize(mapping="distributed")

- :meth:`Model.bayes_optimize`
   if ``mapping`` argument is set to ``distributed``.
   
   .. code-block:: python
        
        >>> model.bayes_optimize(mapping="distributed")
