.. _release.0.4.0-notes:

=========================
smash 0.4.0 Release Notes
=========================

The smash 0.4.0 release continues the ongoing work to improve the handling, fix possible bugs, clarify the documentation. The highlights are:

- Regularization with full distributed mapping
- Multiple forward run in parallel
- Addition of many user guides on the different optimization methods
- Improved handling of sample generation results

------------
Contributors
------------

This release was made possible thanks to the contributions of:

- Ngo Nghi Truyen Huynh
- François Colleoni
- Maxime Jay-Allemand

------------
Deprecations
------------

Makefile command
****************

The ``baseline_test`` makefile command has been deprecated and replaced by ``test_baseline``.

Regularization parameter name
*****************************

The name of the regularization parameter in the :meth:`Model.bayes_estimate` and :meth:`Model.bayes_optimize` methods has been deprecated and changed from **k** to **alpha**. 

It can be used as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> model.bayes_optimize(alpha=2)

instead of:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> model.bayes_optimize(k=2)

BayesResult object
******************

The attribute ``l_curve`` of :class:`smash.BayesResult` object has been deprecated and replaced by ``lcurve``. 
The key ``Mahalanobis_distance`` has also been changed to a shortened name ``mahal_dist``.

It can be used as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> br = model.bayes_estimate(alpha=range(5), inplace=True, return_br=True)
    >>> br.lcurve["mahal_dist"]

instead of:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> br.l_curve["Mahalanobis_distance"]

Sample generator
****************

The argument **backg_sol** in the :class:`smash.generate_samples` has been deprecated and replaced by **mean**. 
Note that **mean** is now a dictionary, whereas **backg_sol** used to be a 1D array-like.

It can be used as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> sr = smash.generate_samples(problem, generator="normal", mean={"cp": 500, "cft": 200})

instead of:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> sr = smash.generate_samples(problem, generator="normal", backg_sol=[500, 200])

------------
Improvements
------------

Return of generated samples
***************************

The :meth:`smash.generate_samples` method now returns an instance of the :class:`smash.SampleResult` object instead of a pandas.DataFrame. 

It can be used as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> problem = {'num_vars': 1, 'names': ['cp'], 'bounds': [[1,2000]]}
    >>> sr = smash.generate_samples(problem)
    >>> sr.cp

Bayesian optimization
*********************

The :meth:`Model.bayes_estimate` and :meth:`Model.bayes_optimize` methods now allow you to define an instance of 
the :class:`smash.SampleResult` object for generating samples. As a result, we have removed all arguments related to sample generation from both methods.

It can be use as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> problem = {'num_vars': 1, 'names': ['cp'], 'bounds': [[1,2000]]}
    >>> sr = smash.generate_samples(problem)
    >>> model.bayes_estimate(sample=sr)

Pipeline stage
**************

The pipeline stage ``build-tap`` has been renamed to ``tap-cmp`` and updated allowing a comparison between the source tapenade file and the new regenerated one.
If an error occurs during this stage, it means that the source tapenade file has not been regenerated.

Documentation
*************

Add the user guide for advanced optimization techniques.

Add developers guide, list of contributors and license to the documentation.

------------
New Features
------------

Conversion of Result objects
****************************

We have added additional methods to some Result objects, which are:

- :meth:`PrcpIndicesResult.to_numpy` for the :class:`PrcpIndicesResult` object.
- :meth:`SampleResult.to_numpy` and :meth:`SampleResult.to_dataframe` for the :class:`SampleResult` object.

It can be used as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> problem = {'num_vars': 1, 'names': ['cp'], 'bounds': [[1,2000]]}
    >>> sr = smash.generate_samples(problem)  # create a SampleResult object
    >>> sr.to_numpy()  # convert to numpy array
    >>> sr.to_dataframe()  # convert to pandas dataframe
    
Slice and iterate over the SampleResult object
**********************************************

We have added two additional methods to the :class:`SampleResult` object, which are:

- :meth:`SampleResult.slice`
- :meth:`SampleResult.iterslice`

It can be used as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> problem = {'num_vars': 1, 'names': ['cp'], 'bounds': [[1,2000]]}
    >>> sr = smash.generate_samples(problem)  # create a SampleResult object
    >>> slc = sr.slice(10)  # slice the first 10 sets
    >>> slc = sr.slice(start=20, end=50)  # slice between the 20th and 50th set
    >>> for slc_i in sr.iterslice(100):  # iterate on sub sample of 100 sets
    >>>     slc_i

Regularization with full distributed mapping
********************************************

The regularization terms have been added for the optimization with a distributed mapping. 
Two types of regularization function are considered, which are ``prior`` and ``smoothing``.

.. hint::
    See a detailed explanation on the regularization function in the Math / Num section.

It can be used as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> model.optimize(mapping="distributed", options={"jreg_fun": "smoothing"})

Model Multiple Run
******************

We have added a new method to the :class:`smash.Model` object :meth:`Model.multiple_run`. This method allows to compute multiple forward runs in parallel based on a sample generated
with the :meth:`smash.generate_samples` method.

It can be used as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> setup, mesh = smash.load_dataset("cance")
    >>> model = smash.Model(setup, mesh)
    >>> problem = model.get_bound_constraints()
    >>> sample = smash.generate_samples(problem, n=200, random_state=99)
    >>> mtprr = model.multiple_run(sample, ncpu=4, return_qsim=True)
    >>> mtprr.cost  # access the cost values
    >>> mtprr.qsim  # access the simulated discharge values if return_qsim is True

This method also accepts the cost function arguments that are used in the :meth:`Model.optimize` method (i.e. **jobs_fun**, **wjobs_fun** etc)

.. code-block:: python

    >>> mtprr = model.multiple_run(sample, jobs_fun="kge", gauge="all", ncpu=4, return_qsim=True)

Makefile command
****************

Three new makefile commands are available:

- ``tap_cmp``: compare source tapenade file with new regenerated one,
- ``doc``: generate sphinx documentation,
- ``doc_clean``: clean sphinx documentation.

-----
Fixes
-----

Fix an issue where passing an unknown key in the **options** arguments in the :class:`Model.optimize()`, :class:`Net.add()`, 
:class:`Net.compile()` methods, and **event_seg** argument in the :class:`Model.optimize()` method, would result in a warning. 
The warning has been replaced with a KeyError to provide clearer feedback when typing a key that does not exist.

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> model.optimize(options={"unknown_key": 1})

resulting an error:

.. code-block:: python

    KeyError: "Unknown algorithm options: 'unknown_key'"
