.. _release.0.4.2-notes:

=========================
smash 0.4.2 Release Notes
=========================

The smash 0.4.2 release continues the ongoing work to improve the handling, fix possible bugs, clarify the documentation. The highlights are:

- Updated make commands in the makefile for consistency
- Automatic generation of the ``py_mod_names`` file during installation
- Automatic search for Fortran files to wrap and differentiate, as well as generation of Fortran module dependencies
- Updated documentation

------------
Contributors
------------

This release was made possible thanks to the contributions of:

- François Colleoni
- Ngo Nghi Truyen Huynh
- Pierre-André Garambois
- Benjamin Renard

---------------
Compatibilities
---------------

NumPy v1.24 support
*******************

Version 1.24 of NumPy or higher was not compatible with the monkey patches made on f2py in f90wrap. 
f90wrap has released version 0.2.13 allowing compatibility with NumPy 1.24 or higher. See f90wrap `PR <https://github.com/jameskermode/f90wrap/pull/191>`__ .

------------
Deprecations
------------

Makefile clean up
*****************

The makefile has been cleaned and here are the commands whose names have been changed:

- ``wrappers`` becomes ``f90wrap``
- ``module`` becomes ``f2py-f90wrap``
- ``meshing`` becomes ``f2py-meshing``
- ``library_edit`` becomes ``library-edit``
- ``tap_cmp`` becomes ``tap-cmp``
- ``doc_clean`` becomes ``doc-clean``
- ``test_baseline`` becomes ``test-baseline``

Only the command names have been changed, their actions are identical. 

------------
Improvements
------------

Automatic generation of the file ``py_mod_names`` at installation
*****************************************************************

The ``py_mod_names`` is used to rename python files from f90wrap by adding an underscore at the beginning.
The file is automatically generated when the command ``make`` is used by running the file ``gen_py_mod_names.py``.

Automatic search for files to wrap and differentiate 
****************************************************

It is no longer necessary to define which files to wrap or to differentiate in the different makefiles. 
The search is automatic by looking at the prefix of the Fortran files:

- ``mw``: wrapped module
- ``md``: differentiated module
- ``mwd``: wrapped and differentiated module

Documentation
*************

Improvement of the Regionalization operators section in the Math/Num Documentation.

Improvement of the dark theme rendering.

------------
New Features
------------

Automatic generation of the Fortran module dependencies
*******************************************************

Currently, in the makefile, it was necessary to write by hand the Fortran files to be compiled respecting the dependencies.
It is now no longer necessary to do this and is managed automatically during installation.
A new makefile command, ``dependencies``, has been added, which is itself called during the ``make`` command.
This command generates a new file named ``makefile.dep`` with the targets of the c, f77 and f90 files to compile, sorted by dependencies.

-----
Fixes
-----

Documentation
*************

Correction of the name of the routing storage state in the Math/Num Documentation: :math:`hr` becomes :math:`hlr`.

Hyper-Linear/Polynomial verbose
*******************************

There was a display problem when optimizing in hyper linear/polynomial. The ``Jobs`` value was not correctly updated at each iteration. 
**The problem only affects the display**.
